Proposal: TypeScript Definitions for core libraries (#79)
protocol/web3-dev-team: proposals/79-typescript-definitions.md

This work provides high-leverage within our suite of JavaScript tools as we mature, refactor, modularize and create. We are already establishing a suite of practices and tooling that are used in varying ways across PL JavaScript projects that use definitions, even though we have very few TypeScript projects throughout our GitHub orgs (<https://github.com/ipfs/js-dag-service> being a rare example, which was initially contributed by Textile). It is reasonable to expect that the majority of new JavaScript code produced by Protocol Labs into the future will make use of TypeScript annotations in some way.

Work on this effort has been largely completed, thanks primarily to @hugomrdias, @Gozala, and @achingbrain with assistance from the entire JavaScript team in various ways. The bulk of the activity has been tracked as a roll-up in to js-ipfs @ <https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs/issues/2945>.

Remaining work to integrate the current set of js-ipfs dependencies into js-ipfs and address the typing for code directly in js-ipfs is happening here: https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs/pull/3550

> Aside from completing the remaining js-ipfs itegration work, the scope of this project includes some additional libraries that re not currently part of the js-ipfs dependency tree, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from completing the remaining js-ipfs integration work, the scope of this project includes some additional libraries that are not currently part of the js-ipfs dependency tree, including:
```

>  * Next-generation IPLD codec libraries (using the js-multiformats pattern)

Reviewer 2: Does this include multiaddr update? https://github.com/multiformats/js-multiaddr/pull/159

Author: I think it probably should be, but I don't have a feel for how much work it is to get that over the line. Do you?

Reviewer 2: maybe @hugomrdias have an idea on the current state. More than having that merged, this will require changes across the stack as this will change how multiaddrs are created

Reviewer 3: That PR should be made non-breaking just to get it finished, i tried a week ago or something but its troublesome. Need to look at it again.

>  * _TODO: what other non-archived, non-dormant project should we include here to achieve the above value & impact ideals?_

Reviewer: Tooling is mentioned above, but we should clarify what we aim to land as part of this. Quite a bit of work has gone into Aegir for type generation, what's the short term milestone/feature set we're targeting for that? Is it already done?

Author: I'm interested in input on this, maybe from @hugomrdias or @achingbrain? The aim is something like "get it done properly" but also "not too large in scope that it goes beyond a S/M project". So I don't want to blow this out with tooling investment.

Reviewer 3: Regarding types aegir is pretty much done.

Reviewer 3: Theirs another angle regarding types, which is documentation. Aegir uses typedoc and it does a pretty good job at taking our types and generating documentation.
But because our code base is still commonjs there is still some minor issues. To overcome these issues i normally need to either change the current commonjs exports to something more friendly or file issues in Typedoc to support all the quirks about commonjs exports :)
This may be out of scope but still, up to date documentation is important!

Author: @hugomrdias :thumbsup: my take is that the tooling is not mature enough for the annotated-JS case to do a consistently good job of it--it doesn't seem to be a priority on the typedoc end and doing it from the jsdoc end (as I've been trying to do) just doesn't work the more you lean in to TS (nobody seems to be interested in unifying the two). But this is certainly something we should take on in a near-future project, to build better and more consistent docs across our stack with tight integration with the TS annotations.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure where exactly to fit this and I believe it is out of scope for this specific proposal, but thought I'd still call this out here. We leverage TS a bit across message-port-client / server pieces to ensure that both ends comply with a wire protocol, I think it could be generalized a bit more to provide same value across more places where we hav client / server or other RPC model.

_How would this directly contribute to web3 dev stack product-market fit?_

Roughly half of the projects that depend on our core JavaScript stack are using TypeScript in some way according to metrics we have. This is expected to expand over time given the adoption rate of TypeScript and TypeScript annotations.

Anecdotally, developers find type annotations useful in the development process even if they don't use TypeScript. It also allows for additional checking in the test/CI process for dependents of our libraries.

#### Leverage
_How much would nailing this project improve our knowledge and ability to execute future projects?_

We have some existing TypeScript in the PL suite of JavaScript. This may expand as we have some developers who have a preference for working with strongly typed, or minimally type checked code. Annotations on our core libraries allows us to add tighter type checking to our CI process for any existing and new libraries that consume that code.

We already have [one example](https://github.com/ipfs/js-dag-service) of code being contributed to the PL stack from a third-party that uses TypeScript and could be improved by typing in the rest of our stack.

> 

Reviewer 4: I think ease of onboarding new contributors is worth calling out specifically. When I joined, I found amount of code so overwhelming that I end up writing some type annotations so I could leverage tools to see what was passed around as opposed to trying to keep it all in my head.

Reviewer 4: Also worth calling out that in the process of entyping js-ipfs and it's dependencies we have identified and fixed fare amount of otherwise unknown bugs in the code base.
